# Vitess Monthly Meeting - 05-10-2018
 
## Agenda

* Vitess 3.0 Plan 
* Planet Scale update
* Kubecon update
* Pain points

## Notes

### Vitess 3.0 Plan

* Finish full subquery support.
* Multi shard DML’s support of PR’s that are already opened.
* Getting all the docs done is  too big of a project, for the next release we will go through all the pull requests that have been merged and create a release note based on that. 
* Once Planet Scale has a team in place, cadence for releases should be every couple months. 

### Planet scale update

* Most of the requests that planet scale is getting are around helping people deploy vitess in their clusters. In the short in term this what PlanetScale will be focused on. 
* In the open source realm, PlanetScale will build and host binaries for vitess. 
* Hiring process is ongoing, offers out and interviews are happening.
* First engineer starting on June first. 

### Kubecon update from Sugu:

* It was awesome.  Sugu presented in front of 4000 people. 
* Most people have heard about vitess before, but didn’t know exactly what vitess does. After Sugu’s presentation they do! 
* Documentation keeps being a big debt on the project. Some ideas that were discussed:

### Pain points:

* Should we require to add documentation for features as part of pull requests? 
  - Not in the short term, it could discourage contributions from new comers.
  - We should make easier for new comers to add documentation (add more structure and guidance in how to add documentation).
* We should be able to find a tech writer contractor that helps with editing / copy.
* @zmagg knows tech writers that could help. They are remote. She will be making an intro to @jitten. 
* Some queries take a very long time without clear reason. 
* Topology scalability issues. Vtgates polls lock server to get information about the tablets. This creates VtgatesNumber*VttabletsNumber of requests to lock server, which will create issues for big installations. 
* Vtages not finding out about changes in topology after a reparent and routing to wrong tablets. 
10 minutes vitess black hole that created an outage at Slack. The root cause for this have been fixed in: https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/pull/3898
* Burst of query failures after a reparent. It fixes itself after a few seconds. It would be great to understand why this is happening.
* Building vitess is a painful, running the integration test is hard. (@rafael to provide Vagrantfile to build vitess in a VM) 
* Does CNFN provides some funds for technical writing? 
  Yes, this is a possibility. The main problem is finding the right person.

