# Vitess Monthly Meeting - 06-14-2018

Click [here](#meeting-notes) to jump to meeting notes.

Date: 06/14/2018, Thursday

Time: 8.00am PDT

[Add to your Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/event?eid=NzJkZXRmOW5wOG83OG1tYjdqaHRtOTg1NWkgcGxhbmV0c2NhbGUuY29tXzkxbXU1cDU5c3Ztbm81MWl0Y25yaGh1MnYwQGc&ctz=America/Los_Angeles)


## Access Details

https://slack.zoom.us/j/196813846
Description:Hi there,

mdemmer@slack-corp.com is inviting you to a scheduled Zoom meeting.

Join from PC, Mac, Linux, iOS or Android: https://slack.zoom.us/j/196813846


Or iPhone one-tap :

    US: +16465588656,,196813846#  or +16699006833,,196813846#

Or join by phone:

    Dial(for higher quality, dial a number based on your current location)：
        US: +1 646 558 8656 or +1 669 900 6833 or +1 877 369 0926 (Toll Free) or +1 877 853 5247  (Toll Free)

    +1 855 703 8985 (Canada Toll-Free)
    +44 80 8189 4088 (United Kingdom Toll-Free)
    +61 18 0079 2488 (Australia Toll-Free)
    +81 (0) 800 100 5040 (Japan Toll-Free)

    Meeting ID: 196 813 846

## Agenda

* Decide on Logo
* Upcoming topo revamp
* Orchestrator Vitess integration improvements
* Sugu's time on Vitess currently being spent on resharding revamp
* PlanetScale update
* Other roadmap items?
* Any burning issues?
* Vitess meetup around same time as Google Cloud Next (24-26 July 2018)

Any questions, reach me on [vitess.slack.com](https://vitess.slack.com) — I'm @skinnylatte there too. Also email me: adrianna@planetscale.com.

## [Meeting Notes](#meeting-notes)

*Participants:* Guido Iaquinti, Michael Demmer, Sugu Sougouramane, Jiten Vaidya, Alex Charis, Leo Lin, Maggie Zhou, Dan Kozlowski, Adrianna Tan, Derek Perkins, Ameet Kotian, Chris Sullivan

Meeting started at 8am PDT on Zoom.

### New Vitess Logo / Logo Changes

We kicked off the meeting talking about the first agenda item, *Vitess's new logo*. The new logo was mooted in the first place because of its current similarites to [Vivid IT Corp](https://www.vividitcorp.com/).

Based on [logos](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScp5hGY98vpRMxs3oRT8c-XJ_b04ei6uCFiYiQe3nDunFbyuw/viewform) created with CNCF's help, logos 1 and 4 got the highest no of votes.

Demmer raised a point that changing the color would make a bigger difference than changing the shape. We decided to do a new contest based on colors: we will ask for 3 color choices for both logo 4 (the logo with the highest no of votes, and as chosen by Sugu), as well as for the original logo.

*Action Item:* Ask designers for 3 color combinations, output 6 logos to be entered in a contest (2 logos, 3 colors each).

### Vitess Meetup & Monthly Meetings

We discussed a *Vitess meetup on 24 July 2018* (different from monthly meeting) based on Derek's suggestion. Google Cloud Next around Moscone will be a good time / place to *get new users for Vitess*. Beer and pizza type of meetup. Look to ClickHouse's beginner and advanced meetups around Percona Live for reference. Date is tentatively set for 24 July 2018.

*Action Item:* Organize event. Follow up with companies and other event spaces to see if they can host.

We keeping Vitess monthly meetings separate from meetups (for international and East Coast folks). For July 2018, Vitess monthly meetup to will be held on 19 July 2018 at 8am PDT. The monthly meeting will be on the third Thursday of every month, for cadence and for *'state of Vitess'* discussions.

*Action Item:* Send recurring calendar invite for monthly meeting.

### Upcoming Topo Revamp

We discussed the *upcoming topo revamp*. As Vitess scales, this affects people in different ways. We have two large users pushing it — a large ecommerce company with over a thousand keyspaces and VSchema that is struggling. Another company has a problem with VTGate. Others are running VTGate as a sidecar, which greatly increases the number of instances.

Demmer brought up some other bugs and workarounds. But these workarounds don't work if tablets change addresses in their lifetimes. This is in reference to [ticket 3987](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/3987).

Sugu talked about how in the early days, we expected different behavior. So some artifacts of old design still linger and have to be fixed.

Sugu talked about how we need to work on resharding workflow. There are complaints about the general design being non-composable. We need to rework this to more easily use componenents to do other things like reversing filtered replication, or using filter replication for materialized views. We need to look at how to create alternative workflows.

Not discussed, but here is a [link](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/3997) to Sugu's thoughts on topo revamp. Here is link to the filtered replication [issue](https://github.com/vitessio/vitess/issues/4002), for context.

*Action item:* To be added to roadmap.

### Orchestrator - Vitess integration

We discussed how the integration with Orchestrator currently is not clean. This has been weighing down on Sugu's mind. After speaking with Maggie, we have an immediate solution.

Each shard has a log record. You have to obtain the log record before making changes to the topo. Orchestrator should obtain the same log before it intervenes.

Maggie is working on this and will get back with more info.

Demmer suggests that we work on better documentation for someone who wants to run Orchestrator, and what they need for it.

This segues into the next topic, about improving documentation.

*Action item:* follow up with Maggie about solution for improving Orchestrator - Vitess integration; add to roadmap discussions.

### Improving documentation

The current state of Vitess documentation is hurting Vitess adoption. We have been looking for a technical writer, but no luck so far.

Technical writers reading this / looking for a gig, please [email Adrianna](mailto:adrianna@planetscale.com) about it. Please pass on to friends / tech writers you have worked with in the past.

*Action Item:* Keep looking for a technical writer!

### PlanetScale update

Jiten, CEO of PlanetScale, gave an update. Dan and Adrianna started with PlanetScale, so now we are 5 (including Lori). Office in downtown Mountain View. Open invitation to the Vitess community to come visit. We provide free wifi.

We have been talking to several companies with interesting problems. PlanetScale will be offering them solutions around RDS / Aurora with modified Vitess.

We are looking for 5 engineers. Job scope at [our site](https://planetscale.com/team). Send people to Jiten / Sugu if you think they'd be a good fit.

*Action Item:* Visit [PlanetScale.com](https://planetscale.com)! Send engineers to us!

### Roadmap

We discussed that we need to work on / update official roadmap.

Question from Ameet about whether there's anything on ther roadmap for online backups, because increasingly backups take more time.

Sugu says there are 500 lines of code re backup. But we will discuss this in our roadmap discussions.

*Action Item:* Adrianna, product manager at PlanetScale, will work on roadmap and discussions with the Vitess community, together with Sugu and Demmer.

### Blockers & Burning Issues

David says that the *outdated roadmap* is a burning issue, hard to see who is working on what, or what changes / features are coming up. Everyone agreed.

There was a discussion about which tools to adopt. GitHub projects, editable docs, using milestone labels etc.

Dan says that more than tools, it's what's on the roadmap that needs to be locked down.

*Action Item:* Adrianna will come up with a proposal in 2-3 weeks regarding updating / improving roadmap. This will follow an in-person discussion between Jiten, Sugu, Adrianna, with Demmer in the city.

Derek raised a question about needing to figure out average query latency with VTGate when microbursts occur. David shared similar concerns. David also raised a question about tracing. Demmer said you can do that now with manual correlations but it's not hooked up to something that can be parsed and understood by Vitess.

Sugu agreed that would be a good idea. To be added to roadmap discussions.

Ameet asked about whether point in time recovery will be supported.

Sugu says we will be adding point in time recovery, and multiple schema support, to our roadap discussions.

*Action Item:* Work on roadmap and tools. Follow up with Derek and David on query latency questions. Table point in time recovery, and multiple schema support, in roadmap discussions.

### Closing Comments

Jon Tirsen presented on Vitess at Velocity yesterday ([link](https://conferences.oreilly.com/velocity/vl-ca/public/schedule/detail/66494)). Not slides yet, but will hear from him about how it went. Seems to be a lot of interest. PlanetScale will retweet tweets about this on our Twitter account, please follow ([link](https://twitter.com/planetscaledata)).

Thank you for attending! Watch out for the next calendar invite in your inbox, and more info on our social meetup.
